                                                                    María Alexandra
                                                                    / Malex /
                                                                    Salamanques Amiel




 Senior Consultant in Design
 Semiotics & Cultural Insight
 Branding, Futures Strategy
 & Creative Leadership


Profile Summary
Malex Salamanques Amiel is a British-Venezuelan creative strategist, semiotician, and futures
design consultant with over 20 years of experience. Currently Director at Space Doctors, Malex
leads initiatives in Creative Strategy, Culture Insights & Semiotics, Regenerative Thinking,
Speculative Design (Futures), shaping the future of brand communications and innovation across
global markets.

A pioneer in applying Design Semiotics and Cultural Insights, Malex has developed and led
innovative methodologies at the intersection of semiotics, design research, and creative strategy.
With a unique ability to translate complex cultural narratives into actionable strategies, she has
guided Haagen Dasz’s global re-stage, developed Lipton’s Tea Machine Development, co-led the
project to defined Colour Worlds for Meta via Saffron, and shaped Samsung’s Gen Z Language &
Design Strategy. In Latin America, her leadership helped develop brands that have become some
of the most valuable in Colombia, contributing to their recognition as key market leaders. Her
consultancy, Mundano Estudio, played a vital role in driving brand innovation in Colombia, Panama
and Chile, winning awards and recognitions (Laus, Latin American Design Awards and Bienal
Iberomaericana de Diseño) and positioning brands across various sectors.

Her extensive exprience spans regions across Asia (Japan, India), the Middle East (Saudi Arabia),
Latin America (Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, Panama, Argentina), Europe (UK, France, Germany,
Spain), and the US.

Core Specialties
• Creative Strategy & Execution: Optimizing brand communications and product design by
leveraging cultural and semiotic insights.

• Futures & Speculative Design: Developing speculative scenarios and regenerative strategies
for brands and institutions, focusing on long-term cultural trends and future-driven innovation.

• Brand Innovation & Transformation: Leading the development of iconic brands and cultural
strategies that inspire growth and long-lasting impact.

Career Highlights
Director, Space Doctors (2021 – Present): Malex leads major initiatives in semiotics, futures
thinking, and creative strategy, developing cutting-edge frameworks like Specualtive Strategy,
Sensory Semiotics and Rituals Design.

Some Key Projects
• Latam Futures Scenarios for TCCC
• Irresistibility and Spicy in Mexico for PepsiCo
• Global Re-stage of Haagen Dasz
• Lipton Tea Machine Development
• Colour Worlds and AR/VR/MR Language for Meta
• Samsung's Gen Z Language & Design Strategy
• The Language of Regeneration & Resilience
• Water Language for Water Aid
• Cancer Recovery Landscape for McMillan
• The Emergent Landscape of Breastfeeding for Medela

Recent Thought Leadership Projects
• The Future of Microbiome
• Rituals in Latam
• Visions from Latinoamerica, a two parts series of conversations with key Latam Furturist
  exploring futures in the region.

Speculative Strategy Leadership
As a thought leader, Malex consolidated the Speculative Strategy Offer, trialing methodologies
such as speculative scenarios, rapid prototyping, and backcasting. She piloted groundbreaking
projects, including Harmful vs Effective Speculative Scenarios for an insect control brand.

Sensory Semiotics & Rituals Design Offer
Malex leads the development of new culture & semiotics based frameworks and drives
innovation in Sensory signature and ritual design for brands seeking cultural depth.


Mundano Estudio (Founder)
Founded and directed Mundano Estudio, a successful creative and branding consultancy in
Colombia. Under her leadership, two of the nrand sdeveloped made it to the list of the most
valuable in Colombia(Compass/Porter Novelli 2021), recognized by multiple industry awards.

Key Achievements
• Director, Space Doctors: Leading speculative design projects and cultural innovation
for global brands.
• Founder, Mundano Estudio: Transformed and created some Latin American brands, with
some ranking in Colombia’s top most valuable brands.
• Innovative Methodologies: Developed pioneering semiotic methodologies such as Design
Recoding, shaping brand language for the future.
• Major Projects Across Regions: Extensive experience leading cultural insight and design
projects across Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, Europe, and the US.

Thought Leadership on Cultural & Social Issues
• Spain's Cultural Analysis for Greenpeace on "The 7 Myths of Big Meat’s Marketing"
• Cultural Research for a non-profit organization supporting victims of domestic violence
  in Latin America.
• Conceptualizing a Health Para-System for Colombia to imagine a transformative
  healthcare future.

Client Portfolio
Coca-Cola / Greenpeace / Meta / Samsung / Lipton / Amazon / McMillan / Häagen-Dazs


Education & Certifications
• MA in Design and Branding Strategy (Distinction), Brunel University of London
• Service Design Master Class, Royal College of Art - Executive Education
• PgD in History of Design and Material Culture, University of Brighton
• Critical & Speculative Design Summer School, University of the Arts London
• Certified in Scenario Building, IFTF

Languages
English (Native/Bilingual)
Spanish (Native/Bilingual)
Portuguese (Limited Working)
Italian (Elementary)




“Malex is simply one of the most insightful people I have ever met. In over two decades, she's one
of the absolute best. Malex has a deep theoretical and technical competence in semiotics, cultural
insight, design recoding and speculative design which can be relied upon to solve the most
intractable design issues or open up brilliantly inspiring future possibilities. And she is a wonderful
proponent of the extraordinary in the mundane, the value of design in enriching our everyday lives
with meaning, of drawing us towards a better future. Malex is unique and wonderful to work with -
connect with her and you'll understand! I am also very proud that she is my friend.”

Fiona McNae / Co-Founder Space Doctors



“One of the most intellectually stimulating Masters student's I've had the pleasure to work with.
Maria did a specialist study in semiotics and what still sticks in my mind is her identification of the
'Translation Point'. The crucial added value of being able to convert research and analysis into
insights with possibilities. Of course she has this quality in abundance.”

Stephen Green / Principal Teaching Fellow Imperial College London & Head of IDE - Dyson
School of Design Engineering



“Maria Alexandra (Malex) created Design Recoding, further developed commercially here with us at
Space Doctors where it is one of our most innovative and impactful semiotic methodologies. This is
a set of tools for taking the semiotic analysis of design forward to specify detailed options and
guidelines that inspire great creative development. Malex is a unique talent - as well as being a
skilled design practitioner she is, in my view, currently the leading analyst & methodological
innovator in the field of design semiotics. She is also a tireless team worker whose analytical flair
extends beyond her design specialism to embrace the semiotics of brand communication across
channels and consumer touchpoints.”

Malcolm Evans I Independent Consultant in Semiotics & Cultural Insight Editor of Semionaut




                                                                    María Alexandra
                                                                    / Malex /
                                                                    Salamanques Amiel




  Brighton / Barcelona / Bogotá                    malexsalamanques@gmail.com            /     LinkedIn
